[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEARTBEAT]
>> A financial and
food industry analyst,
Robyn O'Brien has been called
food's Erin Brockovich.
After her own child experienced
a severe allergic reaction,
Robyn began a deep dive into
researching nutrition industry
standards, and her
work has shed light
on the growing trend of food
allergies and sensitivities.
Additionally, she triggered
awareness concerning
the skyrocketing
price of EpiPens
when she coined
the term Epigate.
We are here to continue the
conversation and to ask,
are we allergic to
food or allergic
to what's been done to it?
Thank you, Robyn,
for joining us again.
It's been about 10 years since
you published "The Unhealthy
Truth."
What can you share with us
about the updates since then?
>> You know, naively--
when we published
"The Unhealthy Truth"
my partner was Random House.
And I naively
thought, there it is.
I've given this to the world,
and the research is there.
The data is there.
And I thought I was
going to go back
to full-time financial industry.
We were talking about
launching a hedge fund.
And the world said, no, no, no.
I was a mother four, and
they wanted to hear more.
And so they were asking
for more of the story.
And personally I had to
really stop and decide,
is this really how I need
to be spending my time?
It was terrifying when
the book published.
There were a lot of threats,
and they were coming
and a lot of different forms.
And to protect my own children,
to protect my own family--
that was first and foremost
the concern that I had.
But then, at the
same time, I knew
I couldn't unlearn what I knew.
And I knew that
I had the ability
to help inspire and educate
other people into this change.
So the first couple of years
after the book published
were pretty terrifying.
And then in 2011 I was
asked to give a TED talk.
And I really had to, again, sit
down with my family and say,
do I want this exposure?
Can we handle this exposure?
Because when the book
had been published,
we had been scheduled for
a bunch of media interviews
just across the board, and
really at the 11th hour
those media interviews
just all stepped back.
So we were sort of left
standing there exposed.
The Today Show covered
the launch of the book,
and I will forever be grateful
to the executive producer
there.
He's a dad of
sons, and he really
wanted to see it through.
So there had been sort of
this quiet period between 2009
and 2011.
And then, when I took the
stage in Austin, Texas
to give this TED talk, the
exposure was very real.
And I just said a prayer to
please let my heart speak,
that it really wasn't about me.
I felt a responsibility in
this message and information,
and to deliver it in a way
that people could hear it,
that their minds
and their hearts
would open to hearing it
so that we could really
catalyze a movement to
really drive change.
When that thing was posted
online, it went viral quickly.
It's been translated
into dozens of languages,
and it's been viewed
around the world.
And with that came
another responsibility.
And so I, again, had to sort of
stop and say, do I accept this?
Do I step into this knowing that
there was risk in that, too?
And as I did, again,
I did with faith
and with love for
my four children
and knowing that there was
the possibility that we
could really impact and
help a lot of people.
What was fascinating
to me was that
when that thing went online--
and we were watching
it tick viral--
one of the first
CEOs that reached out
was the CEO of Nestle's
frozen food division.
And he said, you can
say things I can't say,
and I need you to come out here
to Ohio and meet with my team.
He said, they're my
family, and we're not
participating in
these changes, and I'm
worried that my building is
going to go from five floors
to four, to three,
to two, to one.
And there was so much heart
in that and so much truth.
And I thought, if there
is a CEO inside the food
industry, especially
a company like Nestle,
that feels this strongly
and is this brave enough
to step forward too, I know
that we can get this done.
And that was in April of 2011.
And from that point
on, we've been
engaged in conversations
with the food industry,
and you can see
where we are today.
I mean, General Mills
just announced today
that they're converting acreage
to regenerative agriculture.
We've got organic across
75% of the grocery store.
80% of consumers are
choosing something organic.
So we really have a very
vibrant, robust conversation
about our food supply that
10 years ago was really
just emerging.
>> So you must feel a tremendous
amount of support today
relative to 10 years ago,
feeling that you were out there
alone just trying to
wave a flag and say, hey,
there's something going on here.
And now the world is stepping
up, momentum is happening.
>> I know.
And I think the
personal growth that
has been part of this journey--
you can't underestimate
how important that is.
And to be called into
a leadership position
that you wouldn't
necessarily choose
for yourself or your family--
that's a pretty big calling.
And to really
figure out what that
was going to take
personally to step
into that role-- and
especially as a woman.
I mean, women are sort of--
we're held to
different standards.
And there are
different challenges.
There are different
opportunities.
And so I really had to figure
out and study and learn
how to do that in the most
responsible way that I could.
And so I did study
a lot of people
that were presenting change.
And one of the first
speechwriters and speech
givers that I studied was Martin
Luther King Jr., because he was
trying to create radical
change, and he was
trying to do it through love.
And I knew that
that was my force,
was this love that I felt
and our ability to leverage
that to create this change.
So I studied a bunch
of his speeches,
the way that he worked, the
way that he communicated.
I studied Al Gore because he was
so contentious in the climate
movement and it
became political,
and I did not want this
to become political.
So I thought, what
can we do to make
this nonpolitical, nonpartisan,
that this is a patriotic thing.
And then I also
studied Harvey Milk,
because he was trying
to advance gay rights
and I thought, you know, that's
a pretty controversial thing
that he was doing.
And 10 years ago, to talk about
GMOs was really controversial.
And one of the
things that he did,
which I incorporate into
every public presentation
that I give, is he thanks
people for taking the time
to attend, for taking time
out of their schedules
to be there in his audience.
And I think to acknowledge
that, that we all only have
a certain number of
minutes in our day,
how are we going
to allocate those?
And when I'm hoping
to invite people
into participating
in this change,
to really acknowledge
that they're
giving those minutes of their
day which are so precious.
They're so precious.
>> I couldn't agree more.
>> So those were sort of
the three that I studied.
I didn't have a female
role model or mentor.
I think probably the
one to me that I hold up
as my North Star is
Jane Goodall, somebody
who has spent and devoted her
life to this cause, who I'm
sure when she was in her 20s
and she was communicating
with chimpanzees and
gorillas, people probably
thought she was crazy.
So to sort of
embrace that change
can feel very radical to people,
but to have that conviction
and to build the support
around you that you
need to really move it forward.
And as I thought
about that, I thought,
anything that we've ever created
in our lives, in the world--
you think about the
buildings that we create,
the Eiffel Tower--
they have this
supportive scaffolding
that goes up around them
as we're building them.
As we're constructing these
things of greatness and beauty,
there's this support
of scaffolding
that goes around it.
And I thought, we
need that, too.
You know?
We need it as people, as
we grow into leadership.
We need it as a
movement, as we grow
into the strength and power
that this movement is today.
So that was always
part of my mindset was,
where does that come from--
that supportive scaffolding--
that I know we need
to really create
this thing of
beauty and greatness
that we all know
we need to create?
>> To create change.
And I also want to thank
you, because it typically
is someone who doesn't want
to be a leader necessarily
that makes a great leader.
You didn't set out to be
out there doing something
important, but you actually
just set out to share something
that had deep meaning
to you, and that you
know can contribute to
the betterment of humanity
globally.
That's the kind of
leader that we need.
>> I mean, I think about when
I was in business school--
I was studying
entrepreneurship and finance.
And so when I was offered this
job as a financial analyst
on a team that managed
$20 billion in assets,
my job was behind five
giant computer terminals,
and it was just studying
everyday, and I love that.
You know?
That was research,
and that was my mode.
And there was no public
presentation that was going on.
And really you just got
to be this research wonk,
and that's what I loved.
And that skill set was
absolutely fundamental
in shifting into
this work today,
because as my daughter was
diagnosed with food allergies,
I was able to set
up the same systems
that I had put in
place as an analyst
on the desk around the
situation of food allergy.
So is capturing headlines
and data and information
the same way I used
to capture them
for publicly-traded companies.
>> Mm-hmm.
And, as such, you've created
quite an understanding
of what we need to do.
Can you share some of the
research in the last 10 years
that might update us on
food allergies in children
and what's happening,
and what we're
growing into as a culture?
>> So, I think one of the things
that was probably the most
stunning for me is that we don't
actually count food allergy
deaths in America.
Thankfully there is a
woman out of Vanderbilt
who is starting to
assemble a database,
but unfortunately the data
that we have on food allergies
is not robust, and
it is not as sound
as I wish that it could be.
What we know is that about 1
in 10 or 1 in 11 kids in every
classroom now have
a food allergy--
so that's about two
kids per classroom--
and that the rate of food
allergies increased 265%--
the hospitalizations related
to food allergic reactions--
increased 265% percent
from 1997 until 2007.
So that's not a mom saying, oh,
my kid's allergic to something.
That is a doctor checking
somebody into the ER.
And so we saw that
265% increase.
And when I saw that data I
thought, what has changed?
Because that's an epidemic.
You know?
All of a sudden a statistic
that has shot up that high--
and I had to sort
of step back, and I
started doing digging,
and again looking
for food allergy data in
these government databases.
Unfortunately, it
doesn't exactly exist.
What we do have is data for
the publicly-traded companies.
So you've got a company like
Mylan that sells the EpiPen,
and sure enough, sales have been
absolutely through the roof.
It's a billion dollar brand.
It went from a
$200 million brand
to a billion dollar brand.
So, just for reference,
another billion dollar brand
is a company like Cheerios.
You know?
These are like household names.
So to look at that and say, OK,
so there's obviously use here.
The consumer is
buying this thing.
We obviously have a
hospitalization rate
that is through the roof.
So what has changed?
And so I, again, kind
of put into the system
that I had used as an analyst
to try to capture headlines.
And I remember in October of
2006 a headline came through
and it said, Michigan
State University
received a small
grant from the EPA.
And they had received a
grant of about $440,000
to study whether or not
genetically-engineered foods
cause food allergies.
So as an analyst-- the guys had
put me on the food industry,
and I had learned these models
inside and out, from Kroger,
to Costco, to all these
publicly-traded food
companies--
and I thought, what's a
genetically-engineered food?
We didn't cover
this on the desk.
And so I start researching
genetically-engineered food,
and realized that according
to the US Patent and Trademark
Office, the first patent on
these foods were filed in 1984.
They were issued
in 1988, and then
really widely put into the
food system in the mid-1990s.
The first
genetically-engineered product
put into the food system was
recombinant bovine growth
hormone, which is an
artificial growth hormone that
helps cows make more milk.
So, the financial side
of me is thinking, is
that a bad thing if cows
are making more milk?
That puts more supply out.
That's lowering cost
to the consumer.
But when I realized that
the rest of the world
had not allowed this artificial
growth hormone into the dairy
supply, that all of
our trading partners
from Europe, the UK,
Japan, Asia, China, Russia,
Singapore--
they had said, we don't
want introduce this risk
into our dairy.
And the reason is that they
saw that it increased mastitis
in the dairy animals,
clinical lameness, ovarian
cysts, and then
that also increased
drug and antibiotic
use in those animals.
So, for all of those
reasons they said,
we're going to keep this
out of our food system.
And in 1994 that was
introduced into ours.
So in that moment I can remember
sitting in the rocking chair
that night, putting my
fourth child to bed,
and just thinking,
how many sippy cups
did I put this milk in and
how many bowls of cereal
did I pour it on?
How much have we
consumed of this milk,
not knowing that this
artificial growth hormone went
into production in 1994, when
all of our trading partners
didn't allow it?
And there was a lot of
heartache in that moment
to realize what I didn't know.
And so with that I started
pulling on this tread
and trying to
understand what else
had been genetically-engineered.
And in 1996, a few years
later, the introduction
of genetically-engineered
soybeans.
So again, sort of the
analysts in me thought,
why would a company do this?
Well, the company that did it
was responsible for selling
a weed-killer called Roundup.
And what they were
able to do was
genetically-engineer
the soybean seed
so that it could withstand
increasing doses of Roundup.
So, it's a brilliant
business model
if you're that chemical
company, because you're
ensuring revenue
growth of Roundup,
because suddenly
the soybean seed
can withstand increasing doses.
So that revenue
line is going up.
But what they also did
which was brilliant
was that, by patenting that
genetically-engineered soybean,
they then could charge
the farmer licensing
fees, trait fees,
and royalty fees,
and that farmer had to repeat
purchase that seed every year.
And it's a model we're
actually familiar with.
You think about,
like, Microsoft Office
where you have to
renew your purchase
year after year after year--
any kind of licensing system.
So that's what they
created in the food system
in the mid-1990s.
And so, as a chemical company,
if I had been on that board
I would've said, wow.
This is brilliant.
Look at all these revenue
streams that are coming in.
What happened was, the
farmer all of a sudden
had to pay for an entirely
different model in agriculture
that had never existed before.
So prior to that, a
farmer could save a seed.
But now that the seed carried
these licensed traits,
he was not allowed
to save the seed,
and so he had to
repeat purchase.
And then on top of that he
had to pay the royalty fee,
and then on top of that the
licensing fee, and on top
of that the trait fee.
So now here we are, 20, 25
years later, and the US farmer
is carrying $426 billion of
debt for the US farm economy,
and the median
income for a farmer
is somewhere around
negative $1,600.
Which means, for the
year, he's in the negative
by $1,600-and-something.
And as I thought
about that I thought,
we really do have a crisis
with our agricultural and food
system in the US.
Because if I were a 30-year-old
farmer thinking about moving
my family to Nebraska,
and I go out to this town
and it's gone from
four high schools down
to one and everybody around me
is carrying mountains of debt,
and there's a suicide epidemic
and an opioid epidemic,
what incentive
would a 30-year-old
have to step into
that business model?
>> Yes.
In your opinion,
what role does GMO
play in what you've seen in
the roles of lack of healing
and obesity in our culture?
>> Well I think, for example,
if you were to take a Japanese
child that is eating soybean
that's been grown the same way
for, say, hundreds of years,
versus an American child that
is eating a patented,
genetically-engineered,
Roundup-ready soybean
that has been treated--
the seed has been treated--
and then on top of that
the repeat application
of Roundup, the weed-killer
across those soybean fields.
So one child is
digesting something
without all of these
applications to it.
The other child is digesting
something in keeping with.
That difference was why
I have fought so hard
for GMO labeling,
because I thought
we deserved to be able to
make an informed choice.
Otherwise we just think
we're eating a soybean.
But this soybean that the
Japanese child is eating
is so different to the soybean
that the American child
is eating.
So I took it a step further and
actually met with an allergist
and I said, when you are testing
my child for a soy allergy,
are you using an
organic soybean?
Are you using a non-GMO,
non-genetically-engineered
soybean?
Are you using a
Roundup-ready soybean?
And she just laughed.
She said, I have no idea.
>> It's a soybean.
>> So again, even now within the
medical professional community,
it's like-- they
don't know either.
And, again, I think that
lack of transparency
has been incredibly
detrimental to our health.
It's like, you know the
type of car that you drive.
You know the type of
clothes that you buy.
You know the type of shoe
that you like to wear.
And when we buy computers, Intel
is really proud to say, hey,
there's Intel inside.
We weren't told there
was Monsanto inside.
So, again, if you are so proud
of this product, wouldn't you
want to label it?
>> Yes.
If someone buys
organic milk now,
is it truly safe and
free of the enzymes
that you're referencing?
>> So, I think what is great
about the USDA Organic standard
is it's actually
a legal standard.
And so, by law, the production
of USDA Organic foods--
they're not allowed to
use genetically-engineered
ingredients, which include
recombinant bovine growth
hormone.
So by law, that
artificial growth hormone
is not allowed in the
production of organic milk.
What happens is, the consumer
gets hit with label fatigue.
And here I had been
in the food industry,
but even when I began
the work I didn't
realize that the USDA Organic
seal was a legal standard.
And so, by law, those
foods are produced
without genetically-engineered
ingredients,
without a toxic
weed-killer like Roundup.
They're produced without
artificial colors.
artificial growth hormone,
without irradiation.
And this one got me.
They're produced
without sewage sludge.
So, what you're
actually buying into
is a system that is free
from this set of ingredients.
>> And we can count on that?
>> Yes, by law.
Because there's a traceability
and there's an accountability.
There's a checks
and balances that's
required by producers
every step of the way.
So again, I think the
opportunity in the United
States is-- and this
is crazy to me--
only 1% of our farmland in
the United States is organic.
So we've got 911 million
acres of farmable land
in the United States, but
less than 1% is organic.
And to show how quickly the food
industry has come on board--
and I am super-grateful
for the teams
inside of these companies.
There's a woman at
Anheuser-Busch InBev
that is really on top of the
procurement and the supply
chain.
And they've just launched
a Super Bowl commercial
that speaks exactly to that.
They're like, hey, we've got
beers that Americans love,
and it's the seventh fastest
selling beer in America.
They're organic beer.
And yet 1% of farmland
in America is organic.
So help us convert
farmland in America.
You know?
Your six-pack goes to converting
six more acres, or whatever
it is.
And I think what is exciting
to see is how creative the food
industry is now,
engaging the consumer
and inviting that participation
and that collaboration.
Because we've inherited a
food system that is broken.
And we also have inherited
a financial system
that is broken.
And I believe you cannot fix
a broken food system with
a broken financial system.
So what that means is,
it's an open invitation
for collaboration,
creativity, and innovation.
And that's what
makes sort of where
we stand right now so exciting.
Because, at 1% there's so
much room to run that back.
>> So much room for
improvement and for expansion.
So you're kind of
saying there's hope.
>> I totally believe
there's hope.
But I think what's interesting--
and I come from Texas.
So we've spoken to farmers
and they're like, look.
If I were to bring up
the word "organic,"
my kid's not going to
make the football team.
And I get that.
I understand that,
culturally, because I
was raised understanding
and with friendships
that are in that place.
And so, again, to sort of
say, how do we meet a farmer
where he or she is?
And I think what's
fascinating is
that the regenerative farming
movement is doing exactly that.
The challenge for
the food industry
is that regenerative doesn't
have that legal definition.
So if you're marketing
towards a consumer
without a legal definition,
that becomes a little bit fuzzy.
And that's a challenge.
But for the farmer,
what they're seeing
is, if I shift to these
regenerative practices--
and what that
means basically is,
you're really focusing
on soil health.
If you're focusing
on soil health,
you're realizing
these chemical inputs
that we have been putting onto
the soil time and time and time
again--
let's lift that off.
And what the farmers
are finding--
there's one in Indiana
that we recently met with.
He said, just by shifting
to regenerative practices,
I went from spending
half a million dollars
on chemical inputs every
single year to $734 a year.
>> Knowing what you know,
what products, staple items,
need to be organic in our lives?
>> The thing you eat the most.
So I think it's a different
answer for everybody.
You know?
But really, whatever
you consume the most,
your family consumes
the most, make
sure it is free from these
artificial ingredients
and make sure, where
you can, that it's
free from these
synthetic pesticides
and these synthetic weed
killers like Roundup.
You know, I think about
that Roundup bottle
and how it says "keep out
of the reach of children,"
and you think about,
as young mothers,
you're told not to put stuff
under your kitchen sink
and keep it out of
the reach of children.
And I thought, this has been
sprayed on our food system,
on our food supply
for 20-plus years.
Would I have this bottle
on my kitchen table,
spraying it on a
salad or spraying it
on my children's meal?
No.
So, again, how can a consumer
make an informed choice?
And I think, by law, that
USDA Organic standard
is a great start.
Unfortunately, because of
the supply chain constraints
and that only 1% of our
farmland is organic,
it puts it at a
price point that's
out of reach to too many people.
And I'm extremely
grateful to companies
like Kroger and Costco
who really said,
we see what the consumer wants.
We see that that price
point is out of reach,
so we're actually going to
create our own private label
and create this
in-house so that we
can bring the price point
down to hopefully reach
more consumers.
And I think when that
happened, which was in 2012,
when Kroger actually launched
their private organic label,
that really was
what I think began
to shift the conversation.
Because up until that
point it had sort of
been that Whole Foods, whole
paycheck image of organic.
And for me, if
somebody were to say,
Robyn, what's your
personal mission?
I would say, it's to
make clean and safe food
affordable and accessible
to anyone who wants it.
And until we're there, we
haven't solved this problem.
>> So, someone has food
allergies currently.
Is going to an
organic diet enough?
Does it change for them?
>> We've seen a lot of families
shift to a diet that is free
from all of these
artificial ingredients,
go to an organic diet.
You can measure pesticide levels
in the urine of those families,
and it's just phenomenal the
change that you will see.
Do we have the long-term
studies that we
need that I can conclusively
answer that with?
No.
We don't have those
long-term studies.
What is absolutely awesome
is that the University
of California has just launched
an organic research institute.
So, again, right now we're
sort of in this place
where it's like, he said,
she said on the science.
And, I mean, we could be in
that place for a hundred years.
Families will tell you,
if they shift the diet,
they see all of these different
changes in their own health,
the health of their children.
The naysayers will say,
that's anecdotal evidence.
You know?
I get it.
But I think, again, to
really think about--
like you started with,
what is food without all
of these applications?
What is food without
the genetic engineering?
And the industry that
genetically engineers foods
will come back and say, but we
need this to feed the world.
You know?
And it's like, oh, let me
just pull your heartstrings.
And that sounds like a great
argument, until you step back
and you look at
data from the USDA
and from the United
Nations, and it shows us
that globally we waste
30% to 40% of the food
that we produce.
So we actually have enough
food to feed the world.
What we have is a
distribution problem.
So how can we make organic
food production more efficient?
And I think where we stand
today in the 21st century
with the technologies
that we have
and drone technologies
and the technologies
that we can see on farm
and in tractors-- it
is phenomenal where
we are with technology
today versus 50 years ago.
Take that technology
on farm, marry it
with organic food
production and create
21st-century organic
food production.
That's going to look a
whole lot different to what
organic might have looked
like 30 or 40 years ago.
So to me, again, I think
there is enormous opportunity.
And I've just started
teaching a class--
I'm an adjunct
professor at Rice--
called The New Food Economy.
And it's exactly that.
It's a business
school class, and it's
inviting these students to
come in and participate.
And we just asked them for their
projects for this semester,
and one of them came
back and they said,
we want to create a
zero-waste grocery store.
I mean, imagine
the impact there.
You know?
Imagine the impact.
So that, to me,
is the opportunity
that's in front of all of us.
>> Mm-hmm.
And it's time.
>> Yes.
>> So you speak
about an 80-20 rule.
What can you say about that?
>> So that, I think, maybe was
because I had four kids and I
realized-- navigating this as
a mother in a very real world.
And so for us it was,
do the best job you can
80% of the time, knowing
that 20% of the time they're
going to be at birthday parties.
The real world happens.
You know?
You're on the fly.
Something gives.
In a perfect world, yes.
We would all have access to
free-from food and organic food
100% of the time, but we
don't live in that world.
So what can we do to move
further along the spectrum?
And I think for me that was
always what was so important,
was not to alienate people.
You know?
The fact that organic still is
not yet within reach for all
families-- you know,
there really are--
these are pretty gentle,
delicate conversations.
>> So how can a parent become
an excellent food allergy
detective?
What do they look for?
>> Well, my book,
"The Unhealthy Truth,"
was published 10 years
ago, and it still holds.
There's a lot of
great data in there
to really walk people
through exactly what happened
and to understand
the changes that
were made to our food system
without our knowledge,
without labels.
I think there's some
really basic things.
Where you can
afford USDA organic,
it is absolutely
worth the purchase
because it's free from
these synthetic pesticides
and genetically-engineered
ingredients
and artificial colors.
There were studies done
called the Southampton Study.
It was in the UK and it studied
the impact of artificial colors
on the hyperactivity
and ADHD of children.
And they were these
double-blind studies,
which meant, as you would know,
that the doctors didn't know.
The kids didn't know.
The parents didn't know.
These kids were fed
foods, and they didn't
know what they were getting.
And the results were so
conclusive that these
artificial colors created this
hyperactivity in children,
that the food industry,
which includes our American
companies-- so, companies like
Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Kellogg's--
voluntarily removed
the artificial colors
from the products that
they sell overseas.
So, as I was learning all of
this information, when I landed
on that double standard-- that
our own food companies were
producing products without
these artificial ingredients
for families
overseas but putting
the artificial ingredients into
the products for our families
here in the US--
that was intolerable.
And that is intolerable.
It does not matter my audience.
I have been in front
of farmers that
are growing
genetically-engineered corn,
and when I land on
that talking point
it is universally offensive.
And so, again, we
were saying, we're
not asking you guys
to reinvent the wheel.
You're already doing this for
families in other countries.
We're simply asking you
to place the same value
on our kids' lives here
in the United States.
>> Mm-hmm.
And many countries that won't
exchange with our other foods
that we're not making
those adaptations to,
they say, no thank you.
You keep your
abundance over there.
>> Right.
>> Meanwhile, we're getting
sicker and sicker and sicker.
>> So I think, for me,
especially in a year where
we're having a presidential
debate and you've got all these
smart candidates on stage
talking about health care,
and they're not talking
about our food system.
Food is the most important
input in any health care system.
So what I would love is for
that to be part of the debate.
As you look at the health care
system and the burden of cost
not only on families and
companies but on our economy,
that 20% of our GDP is
now spent on health care
costs and disease
management, what
would you, candidate
A, B, C, D, E,
do to address the food system?
>> What are you looking at,
the cause behind the cause?
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
As a true leader would do.
>> Right.
>> If they were
truly interested.
>> Yeah.
>> Very, very excellent.
So, let's speak into the food
allergy piece for a moment.
The first time someone
encounters a food,
do they have an
allergic reaction?
Does it happen later?
Adult?
Children?
>> Again, I think people
want that formula.
They want an equation.
Tell me what it is.
You know?
Tell me what to look for.
And, unfortunately, that is the
challenge in this condition,
as it can present in
so many different ways.
I remember, when we
were first starting,
people didn't think that
you could have multiple food
allergies.
And now that has been
completely dismissed.
There are families
and children that
have multiple food allergies.
There are people that have gone
50 years, 60 years, 70 years
without any kind of food
allergic reaction who suddenly
go into anaphylaxis at a
restaurant having shrimp,
after eating it
their entire life.
So, unfortunately
there's not a formula,
and it's why I
think understanding
what the symptoms
are of anaphylaxis
in a food allergic reaction are
just so critically-important.
>> Mm-hmm.
And what about the delayed
responses to allergens?
>> I think of two families who
have lost children due to that
delayed response.
There was a young
boy named Oakley,
and he is out of Florida.
And it was over Thanksgiving
he had a bite of a cookie that
contained one of
his nut allergens,
and for most of the night
he had a stomach ache
and had some trouble
breathing, but the parents
thought it was a stomachache.
And it was too late
by the time they
realized it was a delayed
onset of an acute anaphylactic
reaction.
And, unfortunately, we
continue to hear those stories.
So for families that are aware
that their child has a food
allergy, if a child goes
into any kind of state
of discomfort,
whether it's hives,
whether it's breathing trouble,
and whether it's a stomach
ache, your safest bet is to
get that child to the emergency
room and administer epinephrine.
Thankfully, there are
multiple companies now
that are coming online
with alternative devices
to the EpiPen, because that
had so aggressively pushed
the price point up by 600%
over the last couple of years.
There are others
like AVI-Q that are
trying to be more
user-friendly, started
by twin boys that
grew up to start
this company to really kind
of help address the market.
But I think to always have
the epinephrine on hand--
do not be afraid to
administer it and call 911.
If you have any concern that
your child is experiencing
some discomfort, breathing
discomfort, skin rash, hives,
you've got to act quickly
because the stories that
are on the other
side are heartache.
>> What are the most common
allergies that would end up
requiring EpiPen,
hospitalization, et cetera?
>> So, the peanut allergy
is incredibly pervasive.
Dairy allergy is
incredibly pervasive.
There were studies
that just came out
a couple years ago of
the insurance claims
that have been filed for--
the number of people
that are filing
claims due to a food
allergic reaction.
And I think it's fascinating.
It speaks to how ubiquitous
this condition has become.
It's not just a
little kid thing.
We're seeing it
across all age groups.
We're seeing it across
all ethnicities.
So, again, this
raising awareness
of what these symptoms
actually look like.
But shellfish, nuts,
egg, dairy, wheat.
They can all trigger the
same life-threatening, acute
allergic reaction.
And I think, from some
of the families who
have lost their
children, they've
shared stories-- there was
a young girl named Emily,
and her dad reached out at the
very beginning of this work.
And he said, she had always been
able to manage the reactions.
They just never got
that bad, until they
got so bad that it killed her.
So, again, unfortunately
there's not a formula.
There's not a playbook here.
And I think, as parents,
it's our responsibility
to know as much
as we can possibly
know about the condition, and be
as prepared as we can possibly
be at any given time.
And I think that
responsibility is enormous.
And it weighs very heavy, which
is why you see such community
around this condition.
The Facebook groups that
form are incredible.
The women and the moms
and some of the dads
that really have stepped forward
as leaders in this space--
they're incredible human beings
with just the biggest hearts.
>> All right.
So, I want to just add
into this conversation
that, when we are
alkalizing in the body
we have a bigger buffer to
be able to shoulder that
without having the
dramatic reactions.
So, thank you so
much for the work
that you're doing in that--
>> Well, so, quick question.
So where could someone go
to learn more about how
to alkalinize the body?
>> So, on my website I provide
information about that--
drsuemorter.com--
so that people can learn
how to consume the foods
in proportions that are going to
help the system run the way it
was designed to be running,
edging up that alkaline reserve
all the while so that
our buffering system is
in place to help with
what you're describing.
So I want to shift into this--
you're a co-founder
of rePlant Capital.
Please share with us what
is behind that initiative.
Tell us a little bit about it.
>> I'm so excited.
I work with an amazing team.
My co-founders come out
of Impact Investments
and private equity.
They've been at it for
a couple of decades.
And we came together
as a team probably
about two or three years ago.
And again, it was sort of
with growing frustration
that the only source
of capital that
was coming into the food
industry was really attractive,
and it's Wall Street.
And that these
publicly-traded companies
were beholden to the
metrics of Wall Street.
And having been
that side of things,
it was probably three
or four years ago
where I was sitting there
and I thought, you know,
they're grading these
companies on metrics from 1985,
and we've moved so far forward.
And for the companies
to change, the metrics
actually have to change.
And so for Wall Street
to get into this
and realize, instead of judging
them the way they judged them
in 1985, on these
quarterly earnings
calls could they be asking what
percentage of your farmland
is organic?
What programs do you have
in place with your growers
and your ranchers
to help convert
your farmland to organic?
What's the debt levels of
your growers and your ranchers
and what programs
do you have in place
to lower that debt level
so that more farmers can
convert into organic?
And so to recognize
that capital is actually
one of the most important
ingredients in the food system,
and if it comes at you
and it's very extractive,
then that food system is
going to be extractive.
If capital is
regenerative, then you
can create a
regenerative food system.
So I realized you couldn't
really actually separate
those two things.
And so we came
together as a team
and we realized-- we sort
of had to have four parts.
You've got to have the farmer.
And we recognize that not
all farmers are there,
but we'll meet them
where they are.
And there's a lot of
curiosity right now because
of the economic hardship
and the suicides
and the opioid epidemics
and then the soil
health challenges.
So the farmers, and then
the technical assistance.
So the other farmers
who can teach,
who can be out there on the farm
and really show them these soil
practices,
regenerative practices
that reduce their
chemical inputs
and lead to these
different outcomes.
And then what was
also really important
was that we had a
guaranteed buyer,
because it takes three years
for a farmer to convert
from conventional to organic.
And so that's a three-year--
I mean, you're staring
down three years
of like, what's going to
be out here on the end?
And so to have these
companies come in and say,
we're going to
guarantee we're going
to be here in three
years' time to buy that,
and then to have the capital.
So those four pieces were
critically-important to us,
and we realized that we could
be this financial services
firm that came in with these
innovative loan structures
to really work with the farmers
to have them at the table.
The farmer's never
been at the table.
He's never been at the table.
And some of these food
companies like Danone
actually have
incredible visibility
and incredible relationships
with their farmers
and with their growers and
with their different providers,
and other companies
don't have a clue.
So, again, it's really sitting
down with the food industry
and saying, instead of working
with extractive capital
that's forcing you onto this
quarterly earnings model,
could you sit down
with regenerative
capital and what
would that look like?
And we've created all
these different systems
in other industries.
You think about
like fossil fuel,
and we've gone to
solar and wind energy.
And you think about
conventional ag,
and we've gone to
regenerative and organic.
We have a toxic
financial system.
So what would it look
like if we created
a regenerative financial system?
>> Fascinating.
>> It's big stuff.
>> Yes, it is.
What do you see for the future
with companies like Monsanto
and now Bayer?
>> You know, I think it's
interesting because when that
acquisition was made, when
Bayer acquired Monsanto,
the former CEO of Bayer
didn't want to do it.
He actually wanted
to acquire Unilever,
and he saw the shift
towards health.
He was shown the door, and
this new guy was brought in,
and he agreed to
this acquisition.
He also knew that it wouldn't
win shareholder vote,
so he didn't actually put
the Monsanto acquisition
to shareholder vote, and
he was able to finance it
with cash and debt in
order to avoid putting it
to a shareholder vote.
Now, since the
acquisition, Bayer
has lost the value of that
acquisition in their share
price.
The acquisition was for
something like $63 billion,
and Bayer's share price
just got absolutely hammered
as all of these
lawsuits around Roundup
and glyphosate started
to come online.
Today there are 43,000-something
lawsuits around the world
as people really challenge
the safety of that product.
Again, it gets into the
he said, she said science,
and I think we see a company
and an operating system that's
dying.
And it's dying-- not
only consumer-facing.
I think probably
what's incredibly
validating is to see the
farmer step forward and say,
this is not working
for me anymore.
It's not working for my family.
It's not working for my legacy.
It's not working for my land.
And that's OK.
We see companies that
have had tremendous power
in a marketplace and own
that power for decades,
and they suddenly go away.
I think the example that
comes to mind is Blockbuster.
You know?
You think about
Blockbuster as a company--
I mean, they had
stores on every corner.
And it's what we all did when
we wanted to see a movie.
We would go to Blockbuster.
And they had 100% market share.
And a company like
Monsanto in the United
States, it's something
like 95% of acreage
was genetically-engineered
corn and 90% of acreage
was genetically-engineered soy.
They had a monopoly on our
US agricultural system,
much like Blockbuster had
this monopoly on the way
that we viewed videos.
And at the time-- and this was
actually when I was an analyst
on the desk--
Netflix came to
Blockbuster and they
said, we'd love
to work with you,
because we see the
opportunity to stream video
content over the internet.
And the CEO of Blockbuster,
in his arrogance,
said, well, who would want to
watch videos on the internet?
And multiple times that founder
of Netflix came to Blockbuster.
And, again, it was born out
of his own pain of having
to pay these late
fees that he thought,
there's got to be a
better model here,
was trying to create
this better model,
was actually trying to
partner with that big player,
and the arrogance of the big
player didn't embrace it.
And I think that's exactly
what we're seeing here, is
that you had an arrogance
and an operating system that
has grown past its prime.
So today there's one
Blockbuster store.
It's in Portland, Oregon,
I think, or Eugene.
Somewhere up in Oregon.
And I think really that's
the opportunity to say,
we had this operating
system in the 20th century.
We realize now, in
the 21st century,
that we can do a lot better.
And that to me is
opportunity in front of us.
>> And nature supports it.
>> Right.
Work with nature
instead of against it.
>> Right.
As if we had a better idea.
>> So now I'm going to ask you,
where can people go to learn
more?
>> I think there is so
much that we can do.
And thankfully there are
so many documentaries now
that are online about
our food system.
The one that was probably
the most impactful for me--
it's old now, but it's by a
friend of mine, Deborah Koons
Garcia, and it's called
"The Future Of Food."
And it really was one of those
films that really informs you
in an incredibly powerful way.
"Food, Inc." was another one.
When it hit it was
incredibly game-changing.
And I think The
Environmental Working Group--
if you're trying to
understand the pesticide
levels on your produce,
the Environmental Working
Group does an incredible job.
They produce every year a
list called the Dirty Dozen,
and it tells you,
there are these 12
pesticides on your
strawberries, and there
are these 16 pesticides
on your spinach,
or whatever the
number is every year.
But it's an incredibly
informed list.
And I think, back to your
earlier question of what should
you buy or avoid, that list
is a really good roadmap
to use as you navigate
the grocery store.
And then I just
think, where you can,
to back away from
processed foods.
And I think we actually know
more than we think we do.
And we're actually a lot more
capable than we think we are.
And I think about the
boxes of mac and cheese
that I used to buy
in bulk from Costco,
and just making
that gentle shift
to just buying a bag
of noodles and boiling
them the same way
without that whole list
of artificial
ingredients on the side.
So, again, it's leverage
the intelligence
of your grandparents.
I think they know so much.
>> Absolutely.
>> And I'm sure they're
scratching their heads, like,
what are you even eating?
What is going on here?
But I think most importantly,
don't make the perfect
the enemy of the good, because
it can be really overwhelming.
And paralysis doesn't
get us anywhere.
So do what you can where
you are with what you have.
I think it's
incredibly important
to embrace change at a pace
that you can embrace it.
I think about when we were
potty-training the kids
or teaching them
how to ride a bike--
that doesn't happen overnight,
these kinds of changes.
They don't happen overnight.
>> Adaptation.
>> Yeah.
>> In our own favor.
>> Exactly.
>> Thank you so much, Robyn,
for this most brilliant
and insightful conversation.
I truly feel it might
just save someone's life.
>> You just gave me the chills.
Thank you.
>> I believe the biggest
takeaway from our conversation
today is, when it comes
to food allergens, GMOs,
and the unhealthy truth
surrounding the food industry,
that knowledge is power.
Robyn continues to inform
consumers and encourage
a worldwide effort for
improved farming practices.
When it comes to wellness,
we know we can avoid
prescriptions, alcohol, tobacco,
but the one thing we cannot cut
out is food.
If we don't become
empowered in this matter,
generations to come will suffer.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
Join us again next time
on The Healing Matrix.
[MUSIC PLAYING]